handling-network-upgrades: Describe seamless/dump&restore upgrades (#96)
oasisprotocol/docs: docs/general/run-a-node/maintenance-guides/handling-network-upgrades.md

fetch and validate the blocks matching the specific consensus network version**.

There are two kinds of consensus network upgrades that can occur:

- *Seamless upgrade*: on-chain upgrade without resetting the consensus state or
  changing the genesis document (e.g. [Testnet upgrade 2022-04-04], [Mainnet
  upgrade 2021-08-31]).
- *Dump & restore upgrade*: requires wiping state and starting the upgraded
  network from a fresh genesis document (e.g. [Mainnet upgrade 2022-04-11
  (Damask)], [Testnet upgrade 2022-03-03]).

The specific Oasis Core version requirements also impact the way how you
**initially sync your node with the network**:
- If the last network upgrade was a dump & restore one, then your node will
  complete the synchronization automatically by fetching and validating all
  blocks following the state in the genesis document.
- If the last network upgrade was a seamless one, you will first need to
  download the older version of the Oasis Core to sync the initial blocks
  and then sequentially perform seamless upgrade(s).

For example, at time of writing this guide in order to sync your node from

> scratch on the testnet network you needed to do the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
scratch on the [Testnet network](linktotestnet parameters) you needed to do the following:
```

- Download the genesis document and run Oasis Core 22.0.x which synced

>   blocks from epoch 14209 through (excluding) upgrade epoch 15056.

Reviewer: Mention explicitly that one needs to wait until the node stops by itself for upgrade as noted below.

# Handling Network Upgrades

Changes between the major consensus network versions are backward and forward
breaking. This means that you need to run a specific version of Oasis Core to
fetch and validate the blocks matching the specific consensus network version.
Each network upgrade will have detailed instructions posted in the
corresponding [Upgrade log]. This guide describes general principles for
network upgrades and should serve only as a supplementary.

:::caution

Stopping and upgrading your node when there is no network upgrade will result
in losing your place on the current network.

:::

There are two kinds of consensus network upgrades currently in use:

> - *Seamless upgrade* requires that you update your Oasis Core without wiping the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- *Seamless upgrade*: on-chain upgrade without reseting the consensus state or changing the genesis document.
```

>   consensus state or changing the genesis document.

Reviewer 2: I think it would make sense to link here to an example upgrade log of a seamless upgrade, e.g.: ```[Testnet upgrade 2022-04-04]: ../../foundation/testnet/upgrade-log#2022-04-04-upgrade)```

> - *Dump & restore upgrade* requires that you wipe the state and run a new

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- *Dump & restore upgrade*:  requires wiping state and starting the upgraded network from a fresh genesis document.
```

Reviewer 2: I think it would make sense to link here to an example upgrade log of a dump-restore upgrade.

  version of the Oasis Core from a fresh genesis document.

> ## Stop the node

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Reaching upgrade epoch

Once a governance proposal (TODO: link to some docs explaining governance if there are any) is accepted the node will automatically stop when reaching the upgrade epoch (as specified in the proposal). Writting the following in the log:
...
...
```

The upgrade proposal transaction includes the *upgrade height* field. This is
the epoch at which, once reached, your node will automatically stop, writing
the following in the log

```text
{"caller":"mux.go:426","level":"debug","module":"abci-mux","msg":"dispatching halt hooks for upgrade","ts":"2022-05-06T13:11:41.721994647Z"}
```

and on the error output:

```text
panic: upgrade: reached upgrade epoch
```

> Then, the `oasis-node genesis dump` command will automatically execute and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The state of the network at the upgrade epoch height will be automatically exported into a genesis file located in `<NODE_DATADIR>/exports/genesis-<CHAIN_ID>-at-<UPGRADE_HEIGHT>.json`.
```

the consensus state will be written into
`genesis-<CHAIN_ID>-at-<LATEST_HEIGHT>.json` file in the working directory,
where `CHAIN_ID` is the chain ID of the network and `LATEST_HEIGHT` is the

> round of the last block before the upgrade epoch. This command, depending on the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
height of the consensus block at the upgrade.
```

To avoid potential confusion, don't use the term "round" when describing consensus block heights.
The term round is usually and mostly used to refer to runtime "heights".

size of the state, may take some time to finish.

> :::info

Reviewer 2: This "info" part about checking current network height and epoch seems out of place now. Maybe just remove it.

Author: Let's keep it for now. I changed info -> tip and reworded it a bit.

To check the network's current height and epoch, run:

```bash
oasis-node control status -a unix:/serverdir/node/internal.sock
```

and observe the value of the `consensus.latest_height` and
`consensus.latest_epoch` fields respectively.

:::

## Upgrade Oasis Core

> Make sure you upgrade your [Oasis Core](../prerequisites/oasis-node.md)

Reviewer 2: I would remove this `Upgrade Oasis Core` part.

The accompanying upgrade log should/will have instructions on what to do once the upgrade epoch is reached and the node has stopped.

binaries to the current version specified in the [Network Parameters].

[Network Parameters]: ../../oasis-network/network-parameters.md

> ## Update Configuration

Reviewer 2: Similarly, I would remove this part.

Maybe just say "once the upgrade epoch is reached, follow the instructions in the accompanying upgrade log".

If the [Upgrade Log] provides instructions for updating your node's
configuration, update the `/serverdir/etc/config.yml` file accordingly.

[Upgrade Log]: ../upgrade-log.md

> This concludes the seamless upgrade procedure (e.g. [Testnet upgrade

Reviewer 2: I would just skip/remove this sentence.

2022-04-04]) and the new version of Oasis Core can be executed.

[Testnet upgrade 2022-04-04]: ../../foundation/testnet/upgrade-log#2022-04-04-upgrade),

> ## Update ParaTimes {#update-paratimes}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Updating ParaTimes {#update-paratimes}
```

> If you are running either a compute or a client ParaTime node, you will often

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are running a compute or a client ParaTime node, you will often
```

> need to upgrade the ParaTime as well. The expected versions of each Paratime

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
need to upgrade the ParaTime. The required ParaTime versions can be queried from the network registry:
```

are stored in the network registry. You can query them by:

```bash

> oasis-node registry runtime list -v -a unix:/serverdir/node/internal.sock

Reviewer 2: Maybe include a pipe to a `jq` command  that filters out a single runtime by ID.

```

> Then look for the specific ParaTime ID and find the `deployments` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The required ParaTime versions are specified in the `deployments` field:
```

> For example, at time of writing the Emerald ParaTime on Testnet had the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At time of writing the Emerald ParaTime on Testnet has the
```

following record:

```
"deployments": [
    {
      "version": {
        "major": 7,
        "minor": 1
      },
      "valid_from": 14320
    },
    {
      "version": {
        "major": 8
      },
      "valid_from": 15056
    }
  ]
```

> This means that after the epoch 14320, Emerald version 7.1.x is required and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above record specifies that...
```

from the epoch 15056, Emerald 8.x.

> The semver rules for major/minor versions of the ParaTime apply in order to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Oasis node supports configuring multiple versions of ParaTime bundles. The node will automatically run the correct version of the paratime as specified in registry. For example: 
```

synchronize the ParaTime state. To avoid shutting down the node each time
when you want to load another version of the ParaTime while initial
synchronization, `oasis-node` supports running multiple versions of the
ParaTime binaries in parallel. Simply add a list of ParaTime bundles to your
`runtime` field in the config file. For example:

```text
runtime:
  paths:
    - /path/to/emerald-paratime-7.1.0-testnet.orc
    - /path/to/emerald-paratime-8.0.0-testnet.orc
```

> ## Prepare New Genesis File and Wipe State

Reviewer 2: This feels a bit out of place now. I think this should be moved above, before the "Upgrade Paratimes" section.
